multiple exemplars per sample (#34)
prometheus/proposals: proposals/2024-04-03_multiple-exemplars-per-sample.md

  * Prometheus [Fix error on ingesting out-of-order exemplars](https://github.com/prometheus/prometheus/pull/13021)
  * Prometheus [Prometheus support parse exemplars from native histogram](https://github.com/prometheus/prometheus/pull/13488)
  * OTEL proto [Base-2 exponential histogram protocol support](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-proto/pull/322)

* **Other docs or links:**
  * [OTEL histogram](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/otel/metrics/data-model/#histogram)
  * [OTEL exemplars](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/otel/metrics/data-model/#exemplars)

> This proposal collects the requirements and implementation proposals for supporting multiple exemplars per sample, in particular for native histograms.

## Why

Currently the remote write protocol (1.0 and 2.0) processes exemplars individually, which means that if a native histogram has multiple exemplars, they may arrive in separate remote write requests, making it hard to decide if the exemplar is out of order it belonged to a previous set of exemplars and should be considered a duplicate.

> Currently there is no mapping of the "set of exemplars" per sample concept that is in Open Telemetry specification.

Reviewer: Nit for consistency :)
```suggestion
Currently there is no mapping of the "set of exemplars" per sample concept that is in OpenTelemetry specification.
```

### Pitfalls of the current solution

> In the current solution we have a circular buffer for all exemplars. The exemplars are organized into two lists. One list links all exemplars from oldest received to newest so that we can make space when maximum number of exemplars is hit on insert. The other link
> is per time series, linking exemplars from oldest to newest. Also there is a pointer to the latest exemplar per time series to be able to check for duplicates, out of order.

Reviewer: Do you mean "the other list" rather than "the other link"?
```suggestion
In the current solution we have a circular buffer for all exemplars. The exemplars are organized into two lists. One list links all exemplars from oldest received to newest so that we can make space when maximum number of exemplars is hit on insert. The other list
is per time series, listing exemplars from oldest to newest. Also there is a pointer to the latest exemplar per time series to be able to check for duplicates, out of order.
```

For availability purposes, exemplars are written to the WAL and are loaded on restart.

Currently when a new exemplar is inserted, it is only compared to the latest exemplar for the time series in question.

This has a couple of issues:

* There is no interface to pass multiple exemplars to head.AppendExemplar, so multiple calls need to be made, increasing the call count and lock contention.
* If a native histogram has 10 exemplars per scrape/sample and all are received in the same remote write request, we currently try appending all in a loop. We consider them out of order if all are out of order, but if there's a duplicate of the last stored exemplar or some are newer than the last stored exemplar, then we just ignore the old exemplars.

> * However the logic above fails if exemplars are received in multiple remote write requests, so the logic is a workaround at best.

Reviewer: [Nit]
```suggestion
* However, the logic above fails if exemplars are received in multiple remote write requests, so the logic is a workaround at best.
```
